[Peter Telesca and Tom Gilovich]

Here are three possible methods I've come upon, in consultation with Emily and in my own research.

1) Simple subliminal presentation of the word "future." As I'm sure
you are well aware, subliminal presentation of a word has been shown
to activate the concept that word represents. This activation can be
(and has been) demonstrated in numerous ways, the cleanest of which is
in a lexical decision task paradigm. In an LDT, the participants must
determine, as quickly as possible, whether a string of letters
constitutes a word. The crucial finding is that subliminally
presenting a word like "sailor" temporally facilitates the
determination that "ship" is a word, while an unrelated but
phonologically similar word like "tailor" does not facilitate word
recognition. The assumption is that the concept "sailor" as well as
its associations have been activated.Other examples abound in the
literature, but one particularly enlightening and surprising finding
is by Dijksterhuis, who actually succeeded in subliminally
conditioning subjects to associate "me" with "good." This evaluative
conditioning was shown to have effects on supraliminal evaluations of
the self (e.g., pumped up participants showed less sensitivity to
bogus negative feedback compared to controls). Such conditioning
obviously presupposes the activation (priming) of both concepts, which
is all we really need for the study you proposed. 

% Source: Dijksterhuis, Ap. (2004). I like myself but I don't know
% why: Enhancing implicit self-esteem by subliminal evaluative
% conditioning. 


2) Sentence unscrambling that includes the word "future," as well as
concepts and themes that relate to future more generally. Again, as
I'm sure you are aware, in one of the seminal studies on priming,
subjects were induced to construct a viable sentence using three of
the four scrambled words. Half of the sentence dealt with relatively
neutral topics, while the other half dealt with aggression. Typically,
in the control condition, none of the words relate to aggression. When
subjects were then induced to read an ambiguous description of a
person's behavior (in an ostensibly unrelated task), those who had
seen more aggressive sentences thought the individual was more
aggressive. This simple manipulation has been shown to increase the
accessibility of many concepts, and our extending it to the concepts
of past and future seems to be within reason.


% Source: Srull, T. K., & Wyer, R. S. (1979). The role of category accessibility in the interpretation of information about persons: Some determinants and implications.


3) This last one is more specific to priming the future and
past. Ouellet et al. primed the future or past by supraliminally
presenting both adverbs and conjugated verbs to
participants. Participants in the future condition saw 18 verbs
conjugated into the future tense (dirá--he will say) and 6
future-related adverbs (e.g., after), while those in the past
condition saw 18 verbs conjugated into the past tense (dijo--he said)
and 6 past-related adverbs (e.g., before). The authors found that
those in the past condition tended to orient their attention more to
the left, while those in the future condition tended to orient the
attention to the right. This seems to me to be an interesting
paradigm, but honestly the size of the effect they found was pretty
small, so I'm not entirely sure that the results convincingly validate
their priming procedure. Also, the study was conducted in Spanish, a
language in which tense is usually indicated by the conjugation of a
single word, namely the verb. In English, conjugation usually involves
multiple words and can often be more ambiguous. If the connection
between verb conjugation and the concepts of past and of future isn't
quite as tight in English as it is in Spanish, it's possible that
seeing a conjugated verb could induce less activation of past/future
in English-speaking participants than it did in their Spanish-speaking
counterparts. 
% Source: Ouellet, Marc, Santiago, J., Funes, M.J., & Lupianez, J. (2010). Thinking about the future moves attention to the right.


I hope this something like what you were looking for. I'll leave you
with the following general concern. I can understand priming a
concrete object like "sailor," or even a relatively abstract one that
has clear behavioral correlates, like aggression. I would assume there
is pretty strong agreement between individuals about what these terms
mean and how they are instantiated. However, it's not clear to me that
the same goes for past and future. What does an individual think of
when he or she thinks "future"? I would say he thinks of his most
probable life course (on various time scales). For one person it could
mean working long hours in the office, and for another it could mean
raising children, etc. For one the future could mean possibility while
for another, perhaps an older person, it could mean retirement or
death. So even if we are able to prime the word "future" using any of
the above methods, I'm not sure that we will really be priming the
same concept across individuals. 




Before I discuss alternative habituation paradigms, I want to offer a
possible addendum to one of the paradigms you thought up last
week--the one in which subjects flip through various pictures under
the direction to maximize pleasure. In our meeting you mentioned that
you wanted to avoid the trivial conclusion that priming a future
orientation simply makes individuals rush through any task set before
them. One way to rule out that explanation is to include an alternate
condition in which individuals are future-primed (or not) and then are
made to study a list of words or pictures with the expectation of
later performing a recall test. If Professor Edelman's account ---
that individuals in a forward-thinking mode spend less time basking in
momentary pleasure and more time working on new tasks --- is correct,
then the future-primed individuals should spend even more time
studying the list. I believe they would do so, and that result would
both directly strengthen Professor Edelman's theory and weaken the
counterclaim that future-primed individuals simply want to "get on"
with everything.

\subsection{Habituation research}

1) Similar to the dial-rating paradigm we discussed last week, a group
of researchers has measured gustatory habituation simply by having
subjects repeatedly taste sucrose samples and rate their hedonic
value using the previously established "hedonic general magnitude
scale" (gLMS). The useful thing about this scale is that it
measures both the intensity/quality of the stimulus and the
pleasure the subject derives from it. Sometimes these factors do
not co-vary--in the present study, both obese and lean women found
the intensity/quality of the sucrose to be similar, and both
started out with similar optimal amounts of sugar consumption. But
the sucrose-pleasurability functions of the two groups did strongly
differ in their rates of decay, with obese women having a much
slower habituation rate to the sugar. Similarly, any behavioral
differences between future-oriented and non-future oriented groups
could be grounded either in the actual perception of the ostensibly
pleasing pictures or in their conscious willingness/desire to
indulge themselves in an extended session of looking at said
pictures. (We discussed both possibilities in the meeting.) The
gLMS might allow us to distinguish between those two accounts.
% Source: 
% http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S019566631200027X

2) Apparently, many habituation studies have found that the magnitude
of a startle response elicited during a habituation paradigm varies
depending on the valence of the images used. If the subject is being
habituated to positive stimuli, then the startle response is smaller
in comparison to the startle response when neutral/negative stimuli
are being presented. As such, we might expect the startle response (or
any comparable physiological measure--GSR, heart rate, etc.) of
non-future primed individuals to be smaller than that of future primed
individuals if non-future primed individuals really do perceive the
objectively identical stimuli as relatively more pleasurable. As in
#1, this paradigm could be useful for isolating the difference between
perception and conscious exercise of will. 
% Source: 
% http://dionysus.psych.wisc.edu/coursewebsites/Psy804/Readings/bradley93.pdf     (particularly p. 973)


3) Lastly, there is a burgeoning literature on affective habituation
(i.e., decreased pleasure over repeated viewings, particularly in
homogenous settings) that is of practical and theoretical importance
for us. On the practical side, the research cited below offers a more
implementable version of the method mentioned in #1. The authors found
robust habituation to positive visual stimuli (photos of people
playing water sports, which are considered to be high pleasure IAPS
stimuli) over 20 repeated presentations, with only very brief pleasure
rating periods separating each trial. On the theoretical side, this
paper echoes many of the themes we discussed in our meeting. For
example, the authors conceive of affective habituation as encouraging
individuals to seek novel events and experiences rather than bask in
the glow of past or even easily accessible, present glories. All told,
this paper seems to be the firmest and most direct foundation for our
undertaking.
% Source:
% http://www.springerlink.com/content/ku614j4684140770/fulltext.pdf
